Fix documentation of calendar providers by apps (#9326)
nextcloud/documentation: developer_manual/digging_deeper/groupware/calendar_provider.rst

    class CalendarObject implements \Sabre\CalDAV\ICalendarObject, \Sabre\DAVACL\IACL {
        /** @var Calendar */
        private $calendar;
        /** @var string */
        private $name;

        /**
        * CalendarObject constructor.
        *
        * @param Calendar $calendar
        * @param string $name
        */
        public function __construct(Calendar $calendar, string $name) {
            $this->calendar = $calendar;
            $this->name = $name;
        }

        // Implement all remaining functions here ...
    }

The ``Calendar`` class is the class as defined in the next section representing a complete calendar.

The calendar object as well as the name of the entry is given as arguments of the constructor by the calendar class. For now, they are saved into attributes for later usage.

Basic event information -- INode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are some basic methods that need to be implemented on each calendar object instance. These are defined ``\Sabre\DAV\INode``.

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    function delete() {
        throw new \Sabre\DAV\Exception\Forbidden('This calendar-object is read-only');
    }

> Removal of calendar events is not allowed in this example. Otherwise, the backend needs to be updated.    

Reviewer: **nit**
Text blocks should go before their associated code example.

    function getSize() {
        return strlen($this->get());
    }

One helper function is the ``getSize`` method to get the number of bytes that represent this calendar entry's representation. Nothing fancy is done in this method.

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    function getETag() {
        return '"' . md5($this->get()) . '"';
    }

The calculation of an E-Tag can be calculated using the ``getETag`` method. Note, that the returned E-Tag must have the double quotes as part of the returned string.

One can also return ``null`` to indicate that the E-Tag cannot be calculated effectively.

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    function getContentType() {
        return 'text/calendar; charset=utf-8';
    }

The content type of the calendar entry must be provided as well.

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    function get() {
        $name = $this->getName();
        return <<<EOF
    BEGIN:VCALENDAR
    VERSION:2.0
    PRODID:-//Nextcloud/DavCalendarDemo//NONSGML v1.0//EN
    BEGIN:VEVENT
    UID:$name@example.com
    DTSTAMP:20200101T170000Z
    DTSTART:20200130T170000Z
    DTEND:20200130T180000Z
    SUMMARY:Example $name
    END:VEVENT
    END:VCALENDAR
    EOF;
    }

> The actual calendar entry can be obtained by the ``get`` method. This must for sure match the content type above. See the official documentation on vcal calendars on the possible format as well.

Author: I replaced it with an explicit link.

> The actual calendar entry can be obtained by the ``get`` method. This must for sure match the content type above. See the official documentation on vcal calendars on the possible format as well.

Author: Link is included

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    function getSupportedPrivilegeSet() {
        return null;
    }

The ``getSupportedPrivilegeSet`` method can be used to query for the privileges to query the entry for dedicated privileges. When a ``null`` is returned, the default privileges set is assumed.

For the example here and most other cases, ``null`` is a good choice.

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    function getACL() {
        return $this->calendar->getACL();
    }

The real access rules can be obtained by ``getACL``. In this example, we assume that the ACLs are inherited from the calendar. Thus, we delegate the calculation to the calendar class.

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    function setACL(array $acl) {
        throw new \Sabre\DAV\Exception\Forbidden('Setting ACL is not supported on this node');
    }

Updating the ACLs could be handled with the ``setACL`` method. This example assumes constant ACLs, so it will be rejected with an exception been thrown.

The calendar class
------------------

> As mentioned earlier, a single calendar needs to be represented as its own class. Similar to the calendar entity class, the naming is completely irrelevant. It essentially needs to extend the ``OCA\DAV\CalDAV\Integration\ExternalCalendar`` class.

Reviewer: **nit:**
```suggestion
A single calendar needs to be represented as its own class. As with the calendar entity class, you can choose any name for your class. Extend the ``OCA\DAV\CalDAV\Integration\ExternalCalendar`` class:
```

> An incomplete skeleton of such a calendar class is presented here that will be filled in the following paragraphs piece by piece:

Reviewer: **suggestion:**
```suggestion
```

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    
    function childExists($name) {
        // Check if the value of $name represents a valid calendar entry name.
        return $name === 'test.ics';
    }

The ``childExists`` method checks if a certain element is present in the calendar. In this example we have only one event called ``test.ics``.

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    
    function getChild($name) {
        if ($this->childExists($name)) {
            return new CalendarObject($this, $name);
        }
    }

This will pack an calendar entry into its own object as described earlier.

The method allows to request a specific entry and extract it from the calendar.

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    
    function getChildren() {
        // Get the list of calendar entries
        $children = ['test.ics'];

        // Obtain the calendar objects for each of them
        $children = array_map(function ($childName) using ($this) { return $this->getChild($childName); });
        
        return $children;
    }

> Finally, there is a class to fetch all appointments of a calendar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, there is a class to fetch all events of a calendar.
```

.. note:: For the sake of simplicity, here only a static array is used. One could however query a database or the file system for a variable number of entries in the calendar.

Querying the calendar -- ICalendarObjectContainer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> For calendar entries it makes little sense to query all and sort on the client the relevant ones. Instead, the client requests a certain set of objects (like the last 90 days) and the server will do the filtering. This can be achieved by the ``\Sabre\CalDAV\ICalendarObjectContainer`` interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It would be very resource intensive to request all events of a calendar only to then discard most of them during filtering. Instead, the client requests a certain set of objects (like the last 90 days) and the server will do the filtering. This can be achieved by the ``\Sabre\CalDAV\ICalendarObjectContainer`` interface.
```

    }

The ACL defined for this calendar are returned. For the exact definitions, see the documentation of Sabre. At the time of writing this was:

=============  ===============================   =====================================================
entry          values                            description
=============  ===============================   =====================================================
``principal``  uri of principal                  The role or person trying to access the calendar
``privilege``  ``{DAV:}read``, ``{DAV:}write``   Is the role allowed to read or to write
``protected``  ``true``, ``false``               if ``true``, this rule is not allowed to change
=============  ===============================   =====================================================

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    
    function setACL(array $acl) {
        throw new \Sabre\DAV\Exception\Forbidden('Setting ACL is not supported on this node');
    }

In this example, no updates of the ACL rules are allowed. Thus, an exception is thrown if the client tries to do so.

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    
    function getSupportedPrivilegeSet() {
        return null;
    }

> The supported privileges can be overwritten by implementing this method. When returning ``null`` the default by Sabre is used which is fine for many tasks. See also the documentation of Sabre on this.

Reviewer: **fix:**
```suggestion
The supported privileges can be overwritten by implementing this method. When returning ``null``, the Sabre default is used which is fine for many tasks. Please also take a look at the [Sabre Documentation](https://sabre.io/dav/acl/) for more information.
```

Properties of the external calendar -- IProperties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Finally, there are some properties of a calendar to be specified. The CalDAV interface allows here for a rather generic interface. You will have to visit the details of the CalDAV standard on what properties make sense for you.

Reviewer: **fix:**
```suggestion
You will be able to specify some calendar properties. The CalDAV interface allows for a rather generic interface. You will have to check the details of the CalDAV standard on what properties make sense for you.
```

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    
    function getProperties($properties) {
        // A backend should provide at least minimum properties
        return [
            '{DAV:}displayname' => 'Dav Example Calendar: ' . $this->calendarUri,
            '{http://apple.com/ns/ical/}calendar-color'  => '#565656',
            '{' . Plugin::NS_CALDAV . '}supported-calendar-component-set' => new SupportedCalendarComponentSet(['VTODO', 'VEVENT']),
        ];
    }

> Here a basic stub of calendar properties are provided. It is a basic name, a color and the setting to allow both appointments (``VEVENT``) and tasks (``VTODO``) in the calendar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here a basic stub of calendar properties are provided. It is a basic name, a color and the setting to allow both events (``VEVENT``) and tasks (``VTODO``) in the calendar.
```

> Here a basic stub of calendar properties are provided. It is a basic name, a color and the setting to allow both appointments (``VEVENT``) and tasks (``VTODO``) in the calendar.

Reviewer: **fix:**
```suggestion
Here a basic stub of calendar properties are provided. It is a basic name, a color and the setting to allow both events (``VEVENT``) and tasks (``VTODO``) in the calendar.
```

Author: Resolved as duplicate

> Here a basic stub of calendar properties are provided. It is a basic name, a color and the setting to allow both appointments (``VEVENT``) and tasks (``VTODO``) in the calendar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here a basic stub of calendar properties are provided. It is a basic name, a color and the setting to allow both events (``VEVENT``) and tasks (``VTODO``) in the calendar.
```

Author: Resolved as duplicate

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    
    function propPatch(PropPatch $propPatch) {
        // We can just return here and let oc_properties handle everything
    }

> This method needs implementation to satisfy PHP but can be left empty as the core handles this most probably.

Reviewer: **question:**
I think the return type should be `false` here for Sabre to pass the `propPatch` to the next provider. Please check the code if possible. Otherwise a parent::propPatch could also work.

Author: I am a bit lost on this one. I tried to do some research on this but did not really find something useful that I was able to understand right now.
- One hint is in the [calendar app](https://github.com/nextcloud/server/blob/7fecdf61299e7213fd857e7d89ce9b33db05c47b/apps/dav/lib/CalDAV/Calendar.php#L268-L274). There, obviously, nothing is returned (so, it would be a `void` return type).
- Also, in the Sabre code no return tye is declared.
- In the calendar app, some hint is made that calling the parent class might be required for shared calendars.

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    namespace OCA\YourAppName\DAV;

    use OCA\DAV\CalDAV\Integration\ExternalCalendar;
    use OCA\DAV\CalDAV\Integration\ICalendarProvider;

    class CalendarPlugin implements ICalendarProvider {

        public function getAppId(): string {
            return 'yourappname';
        }

        public function fetchAllForCalendarHome(string $principalUri): array {
            return [
                new Calendar($principalUri, 'my-calendar-1234'),
            ];
        }

        public function hasCalendarInCalendarHome(string $principalUri, string $calendarUri): bool {
            return $calendarUri === 'my-calendar-1234';
        }

        public function getCalendarInCalendarHome(string $principalUri, string $calendarUri): ?ExternalCalendar {
            if ($this->hasCalendarInCalendarHome($principalUri, $calendarUri)) {
                return new Calendar($principalUri, $calendarUri);
            }

            return null;
        }
    }

The calendar plugin class needs to implement the interface ``\OCA\DAV\CalDAV\Integration\ICalendarProvider`` that defines some methods to query the list of calendars an app can provide.

> The method ``getAppId`` is mainly for accounting and returns the name of the app.

Reviewer: **suggestion**
```suggestion
The method ``getAppId`` returns the name of the app.
```

> The method ``fetchAllForCalendarHome`` returns a list of all calendars class instance that the app knows of. In this example only one calendar is registered. By adding further entries to the array, more calendars can be made available.

Reviewer: **suggestion:**
```suggestion
The method ``fetchAllForCalendarHome`` returns a list of all `Calendars`  that the app knows of.
```

> Note the ``principalUri`` is passed by the caller while the ``calendarUri`` in the constructor of the calendar instance is just some (relative) uri (string) that identifies the calender uniquely. It can then be used in the calendar class to extract the appropriate entries that should be present in the calendar.

Reviewer: **suggestion**
```suggestion
Note  that the ``principalUri`` is passed by the caller, while the ``calendarUri`` in the constructor of the calendar instance is a (relative) uri (string) that identifies the calender uniquely. The uri can then be used in the calendar class to extract the appropriate entries that should be present in the calendar.
```

> Again, there is a function ``hasCalendarInCalendarHome`` that checks if a certain combination of ``principalUri`` and ``calendarUri`` are existing. Here, it is just hard-coded to exactly one calendar.

Reviewer: **suggestion:**
```suggestion
The function ``hasCalendarInCalendarHome`` checks if a certain combination of ``principalUri`` and ``calendarUri`` exist. Here, it is just hard-coded to exactly one calendar, but in your own implementation you should do more stringent checks.
```

Read-only support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To provide calendar(s) you have to write a class that implements the ``OCP\Calendar\ICalendarProvider`` interface.

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    use OCP\Calendar\ICalendarProvider;

    class CalendarProvider implements ICalendarProvider {

        public function getCalendars(string $principalUri, array $calendarUris = []): array {
            $calendars = [];
            // TODO: Run app specific logic to find calendars that belong to
            //       $principalUri and fill $calendars

            // The provider can simple return an empty array if there is not
            // a single calendar for the principal URI
            if (empty($calendars)) {
                return [];
            }

            // Return instances of \OCP\Calendar\ICalendar
            return $calendars;
        }
    }

This ``CalendarProvider`` class is then registered in the :ref:`register method of your Application class<Bootstrapping>` with ``$context->registerCalendarProvider(CalendarProvider::class);``.

Write support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Calendars that only return `ICalendar` are implicitly read-only. If your app's calendars can be written to, you may implement the ``ICreateFromString``. It will allow other apps to write calendar objects to the calendar by passing the raw iCalendar data as string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Calendars that only return `ICalendar` are implicitly read-only. If your app's calendars can be written to, you may implement the ``ICreateFromString`` interface. It will allow other apps to write calendar objects to the calendar by passing the raw iCalendar data as string.
```
